Okay.
NOTE CONF
Thank you all for coming.
I hope it's worth your while.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I said I would fulfil the promise to
tell those of you who wanted to know about it.
NOTE CONF
Something about how these things were done a few hundred
years ago.
NOTE CONF
So these are actually slides I prepared for my institute
lunchtime talk.
NOTE CONF
So they're not originally aimed at you, but that's okay
because there's only a little bit that is a bit
NOTE CONF
more formal.
So I started by explaining to my colleagues who generally
NOTE CONF
don't know syllogisms what a syllogism is in modern notation.
And since it's been a few weeks since we've done
NOTE CONF
them, this should be familiar, but maybe the reminder is
helpful.
NOTE CONF
So we talked about a universe and predicates, and we
defined entailment which is basically a disguised universal implication.
NOTE CONF
And we had the notion of categorical proposition from Aristotle,
which was one of these things with a entails B,
NOTE CONF
not B or a does not entail not B or
whatever.
NOTE CONF
And we said we can flip things around.
And we introduced the syllogism.
NOTE CONF
We didn't write it down quite like this.
So this is just annoying mathematician abstraction.
NOTE CONF
But it means exactly what we wrote down.
I'm just using a few symbols because I want to
NOTE CONF
later.
And then I explain to them how we can derive
NOTE CONF
all the sound syllogisms.
So that's what we did during the course.
NOTE CONF
We said that we have this basic sound syllogism, which
was called Barbara, for reasons that we're now going to
NOTE CONF
understand, and that all the others can be got from
Barbara by doing one of four operations.
NOTE CONF
So we can substitute for predicates by other predicates, or
by negated predicates.
NOTE CONF
We had double negation cancellation.
We had contra position on sequence flip and negate, and
NOTE CONF
we had contra position on rules flip and negates.
Um, have you all learned your Greek alphabet?
NOTE CONF
How many of you know what this letter is and
are not Greek?
NOTE CONF
Capital Epsilon okay in there just because I like Capital
Epsilon as a letter.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what did Aristotle do?
Aristotle did not have this notation.
NOTE CONF
So he talked about, as we said, the notion of
a universal affirmative proposition.
NOTE CONF
So this is translating Greek into English but not doing
anything else.
NOTE CONF
And he didn't actually express it as, um, every Greek
is human.
NOTE CONF
He expressed it as human is true of every Greek.
And in medieval times they introduced a handy symbolic abbreviation
NOTE CONF
for this.
Curiously, the medieval logicians were quite happy to use Latin
NOTE CONF
letters rather than Greek letters.
Um, so they wrote A of a B for the
NOTE CONF
universal affirmative a wholes of every b, we would write
it as every b is a And they introduced a
NOTE CONF
similar abbreviation E for the negative no B is a
or in Aristotle's phrasing, a holes of no b, and
NOTE CONF
then the particular ones.
These are what we call the existential ones I, a,
NOTE CONF
b is the particular affirmative a holds of some b,
so there is some b that of which a holds
NOTE CONF
and o is the negative.
There is some B of which A fails to hold.
NOTE CONF
And the way you're supposed to remember these magic things
a e I o r that afirmo has a and
NOTE CONF
I in it and means I affirm and nego has
e and o in it, and means I deny, which
NOTE CONF
I'm sure is very helpful.
And there was a lot of terminology about this.
NOTE CONF
And if you learned all this stuff until quite recently,
you had to learn all this terminology.
NOTE CONF
I think it's much easier in modern logic.
So these a and B.
NOTE CONF
So this is things like humans Greek mortal.
We call them predicates.
NOTE CONF
They were called terms in the premodern logic.
And confusingly a that is um, what is a human
NOTE CONF
or mortal is the predicate, and B that is Greeks
or mortals, Greeks or humans are the subject.
NOTE CONF
So here predicate and subject are being used in the
linguistic grammatical sense.
NOTE CONF
If you did grammatical analysis in any remotely formal sense,
you talked about, um, the dog bit the man.
NOTE CONF
The dog is the subject of the sentence and bit
the man is the predicate of the sentence.
NOTE CONF
So that's how the the terminology was used.
Um, we also remember mentioned at some point that Aristotle
NOTE CONF
didn't believe in talking about fiction, and that means he
had the existential assumption.
NOTE CONF
This is something I have to explain to my colleagues,
because we don't do it now.
NOTE CONF
And we saw at some point that that meant that
A holds of every B and A fails of some
NOTE CONF
B are not actually the negatives of each other as
they are in modern logic and the way we did
NOTE CONF
it.
But for Aristotle, they weren't.
NOTE CONF
They were two different statements.
So that was a bunch of terminology.
NOTE CONF
Then there's yet more terminology.
Again, this is translated from Greek into English.
NOTE CONF
So Aristotle then talked about different styles of argument.
And in English we talk about different figures of argument.
NOTE CONF
So a figure is more or less what we've been
calling a syllogism.
NOTE CONF
It's a premise two premises and a conclusion.
And these things have the property that the two premises
NOTE CONF
share something.
So in the standard example, the two premises share human
NOTE CONF
and human is the subject of the first and the
predicate of the second.
NOTE CONF
So we have a major premise, as it's called, containing
the predicate or predicate of the conclusion.
NOTE CONF
So in the conclusion the predicate is mortal.
So the major premise is the one that contains the
NOTE CONF
mortal predicate.
And the minor premise is the one that contains the
NOTE CONF
others.
So if you're learning this in traditional notation, you look
NOTE CONF
at the standard, the initial example.
All humans are mortal, blah blah blah, and you can
NOTE CONF
label all the bits in it as being subject, predicate,
and whether they belong to the middle term or the
NOTE CONF
major term or whatever.
And just for good measure, the terms within the predicate.
NOTE CONF
So also given mid-major labels.
So I find it extremely confusing and I just can't
NOTE CONF
remember it.
So I do not remember it.
NOTE CONF
I have no need to remember it and nor have
you, but once upon a time you would have had
NOTE CONF
to remember it.
So why is he talking about figures?
NOTE CONF
Because arguments have different structures.
So if you think about Barbara, Barbara says all humans
NOTE CONF
are mortal, all mortals, and so all Greeks are mortal
and therefore, no, sorry, all Greeks are human and therefore
NOTE CONF
all Greeks are mortal.
If you write that in the medieval notation, then the
NOTE CONF
shared term looks like that.
So figures of the so-called first time kind are Barbara
NOTE CONF
like figures.
And then there are several other ways you could permute
NOTE CONF
the terms, so the shared term might be in the
first position in each one, or it might be in
NOTE CONF
the last position, or it might be at the end.
So here we have.
NOTE CONF
The first kind is where the shared term is at
the end of the second and the beginning of the
NOTE CONF
first term.
The fourth kind is when the shared term is at
NOTE CONF
the beginning of the first and the beginning of the
second.
NOTE CONF
Now, we were pretty lax about swapping things around.
We said, it doesn't matter what order you put things
NOTE CONF
in too often, but remember, these are actually categorical statements,
so the order matters.
NOTE CONF
Um, very confusingly, Aristotle didn't recognise this kind of argument
as a different kind of figure.
NOTE CONF
He treated it as a special kind of first figure.
And I tried to understand that, and I read people's
NOTE CONF
analysis of it, and I still don't know what he
was doing there.
NOTE CONF
So there was definitely some confusion going on.
Now all the way through this course, we have been
NOTE CONF
misusing the term syllogism okay.
Because actually for Aristotle, a syllogism was something that was
NOTE CONF
sound.
So in Aristotle's terminology, what we have been calling a
NOTE CONF
syllogism was actually called a figure, the Greek for figure.
And what we have been calling a sound syllogism was
NOTE CONF
what he called a syllogism.
I'm not quite sure where that shift in terminology happened.
NOTE CONF
I think it happened between the medieval era and modern
logic, but it's what we have at the moment.
NOTE CONF
So we've got figures.
That is what we were calling syllogisms, and we have
NOTE CONF
to decide whether they're sound or unsound.
When we looked at Barbara, we stared at it and
NOTE CONF
said, that's obviously sound, right?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because it's implication and transitivity of implication, blah blah blah
blah.
NOTE CONF
It's obviously sound.
Or you can prove by prove it by truth tables.
NOTE CONF
If you believe truth tables are sound.
Um, Aristotle did the same.
NOTE CONF
So for any syllogism that was in what he called
the first figure, that is where the shared term of
NOTE CONF
the premises looks like this.
Like the Barbara style, he said each one is either
NOTE CONF
self-evidently sound or self-evidently unsound according to whether it was
or not.
NOTE CONF
Then for the second, third and variance of the fourth,
he did the same kind of argument that we used
NOTE CONF
to determine whether they were sound.
But because he had the existential assumption, he had some
NOTE CONF
other things he could do.
So if you remember, that's the affirmative.
NOTE CONF
That's the particular affirmative.
So this is some B is a and this is
NOTE CONF
some A's.
B if you remember the existential statement is symmetrical.
NOTE CONF
If some A's.
B then it follows that some b is a.
NOTE CONF
So he had that symmetry rule.
Similarly with the negative one negative universal because he had
NOTE CONF
the existential assumption, he could also say that if I
know all B or A, then I know that some
NOTE CONF
A's b.
Um, he had contradiction.
NOTE CONF
So he was able to do proof by contradiction.
And there was a thing called thesis.
NOTE CONF
Which was an argument that is not quite understood and
is generally believed probably to be wrong, but he only
NOTE CONF
used it when it gave the right answer, which is
a strategy that may be familiar to some of you
NOTE CONF
until you found a better way to do it.
It's something that mathematicians.
NOTE CONF
So when mathematicians fall into error, usually the error is
usually using a faulty argument argument to prove a correct
NOTE CONF
conclusion.
We don't often prove things that are false, although it
NOTE CONF
does happen, but we quite often prove things that are
true without correctly proving them.
NOTE CONF
And for unsound things he had the notion of counterexamples,
so it was all quite familiar in the way that
NOTE CONF
you've learned.
It's just the notation was much harder to deal with.
NOTE CONF
Then what happened?
Well, in Europe, the period between about 414 hundred was
NOTE CONF
a pretty dodgy period for academics because there was a
lot of stuff going on with the fall of empires
NOTE CONF
and the rise of empires and various invasions from other
places.
NOTE CONF
So the early, early, what do we call the first
millennium and early mid to late first millennium was a
NOTE CONF
quiet time for logic in Europe, and logic was more
happening in the Arab world and it wasn't really spreading
NOTE CONF
to Europe very fast.
By the early second millennium, then medieval logicians in Europe
NOTE CONF
were partly finding out about what's been going on in
the Arab world and also developing it.
NOTE CONF
So Avicenna is a Persian logician who wrote in Arabic
for mathematical stuff.
NOTE CONF
These are European logicians.
All of them are pretty famous.
NOTE CONF
But Boethius was very famous as a philosopher.
Abelard.
NOTE CONF
Anybody heard of Abelard?
Very tragic story.
NOTE CONF
Go and look him up.
William of Ockham.
NOTE CONF
Who's heard of Occam's razor?
This.
NOTE CONF
Is that William and John Burdon famous fable called Burdon's
ass as in donkey.
NOTE CONF
Because we speak English.
So all these people took Aristotle's theory and they refined
NOTE CONF
it and developed it and tidied up a bit.
And one of the things they tidied it up was
NOTE CONF
the way Aristotle had said, A belongs to every B,
and they changed it to B, every B is A.
NOTE CONF
There was a lot of other stuff going on.
So Aristotle did.
NOTE CONF
Aristotle tried to do something that we now call modal
logic.
NOTE CONF
Modal logic is about reasoning about what must be true
and what may be true.
NOTE CONF
So it's the rules.
So if it must be the case that it must
NOTE CONF
be the case, then it must be the case.
And you have rules like that.
NOTE CONF
So the rules for that kind of logic are different.
Aristotle tried to do an analysis of this kind of
NOTE CONF
logic.
And essentially he failed.
NOTE CONF
So I have tried to read it in translation, obviously,
and it makes no sense.
NOTE CONF
I've read other people who are much better at this,
and they say it doesn't make much sense either.
NOTE CONF
But Borodin, who must have been an incredibly clever person,
took this mess and developed it into a fairly coherent
NOTE CONF
explanation of the logics of must and maybe and it
was probably one can't quite tell, but it was very
NOTE CONF
probably essentially the same as the logic we now call
S5, which was invented in the 1950s by Steven Carlini,
NOTE CONF
who was on the slide of the last lecture.
So Borodin was approximately 500 years ahead of his time,
NOTE CONF
which is quite impressive.
Um, however, your average logic student probably didn't study modal
NOTE CONF
logic, but they did study syllogisms and they had this
horrible terminology and they didn't have our nice modern notation.
NOTE CONF
So how did they learn which syllogisms were sound?
Well, they learned it by memorising this rhyme.
NOTE CONF
So.
How you pronounce this depends on which bit of Europe
NOTE CONF
you were and when in Europe you were.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I won't attempt to do what a pre-World War one.
English.
NOTE CONF
Well, okay, I will attempt to do what in pre-World
War one English logician would have done.
NOTE CONF
So before the first war, a student learning this in
England would have said something like Barbara Hillier and Derry
NOTE CONF
Theriault, Barry Lipton, sealants de bitties, pasma and so on.
Um, nowadays, we wouldn't do that if you were an
NOTE CONF
Italian.
medieval Italian logician, then you would have said Barbara and
NOTE CONF
Daddy.
Fatty or bada lepton.
NOTE CONF
And that would work for most of Europe, except you
might say, salad.
NOTE CONF
And instead of children, or in some places you might
even say salad and but probably not.
NOTE CONF
But I mean, it doesn't have any particular structure to
it, but it's got a bit of a jingle to
NOTE CONF
it, and it's not too hard to learn by heart
if you want to do so.
NOTE CONF
And the reason you do this is that each of
these words, which are almost mostly nonsense words, but not
NOTE CONF
all of them, they name one of the syllogisms, and
they not only name it, they tell you what it
NOTE CONF
is and how to prove that it sound.
So how does this work?
NOTE CONF
We'll look at Barbara.
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
So the first three vowels of Barbara are a, a,
a.
NOTE CONF
And that tells you what kind of the categorical propositions
are, because a is the universal affirmative.
NOTE CONF
So we know that this is all, all, all.
And then the first letter is b, c, d or
NOTE CONF
f.
And that tells you what the shape of the proposition
NOTE CONF
is in Aristotle's term.
First figure.
NOTE CONF
Second figure.
Third figure.
NOTE CONF
Fourth figure.
So Barbara has the shape a b b c a
NOTE CONF
c.
So that gives us the shape that we know and
NOTE CONF
love for Barbara.
And we saw Brent somewhere in the lectures.
NOTE CONF
So if you go back you can check that it
had that shape.
NOTE CONF
Um and then so that tells you what the syllogism
is.
NOTE CONF
And then some of the other letters tell you how
to derive the ones that are not obvious.
NOTE CONF
So here is one Dorothy.
Says if all ASC and all b a c, then
NOTE CONF
some a is.
B this is not true for us.
NOTE CONF
This needs the existential assumption.
So this is one that was true for Aristotle.
NOTE CONF
And this letter p here after the r.
So it would be T but dart up t.
NOTE CONF
The p tells you that there's an instantiation of a
universal thing to an existential thing.
NOTE CONF
Because this is Aristotle.
If you know that every C is B, you know
NOTE CONF
that some b is C.
So that tells you how to prove that and you
NOTE CONF
end up with daddy.
Another thing that you can do.
NOTE CONF
So you might be able to swap the subject and
predicate.
NOTE CONF
So for the existential ones every a is so a
some A's B is equivalent to some B is A
NOTE CONF
no, a is B is equivalent to no, b is
a.
NOTE CONF
So with data C, then you need to swap b
and c here and you get something that is Dari
NOTE CONF
again.
Sometimes you want to swap the premises.
NOTE CONF
So when we did syllogisms, we just assumed we could
swap premises because it just made sense.
NOTE CONF
But they had this terminology of major premise and minor
premise.
NOTE CONF
So you have to have an explicit rule that says
you can swap two premises around.
NOTE CONF
So the letter M told that you could do that.
So chemistry is the m between the r a and
NOTE CONF
the E tells you that you can reduce this to
something with an E and an A, which is Callard
NOTE CONF
and Killara and I'm saying on time.
And they had contra position as well.
NOTE CONF
So the letter C tells you that whatever this syllogism
is so barocco which I think we also had in
NOTE CONF
one of the exercises.
So that says every A is B and no A
NOTE CONF
is C tells you that no B is C that
can be got from Barbara by contra position.
NOTE CONF
So if you choose to and some of you may
choose to, if you could go back to the table
NOTE CONF
of valid syllogisms that we had and check against the
rhyme and see how this works.
NOTE CONF
Um.
To me, learning this stuff is a lot harder than
NOTE CONF
working every one of them out from first principle each
time you need to do it.
NOTE CONF
But the, um, native intelligence of logic students probably varied
as much as it does today, and they had to
NOTE CONF
pass exams too.
And their exams were all oral, so they had to
NOTE CONF
be able to do stuff quite fast.
Um, so that was what medieval syllogisms are and how
NOTE CONF
the notation worked.
And this is what you would have been doing 500
NOTE CONF
years ago if you were studying this stuff.
And I'll just sort of finish this first half of
NOTE CONF
today with something that should have should not have surprised
me, but did.
NOTE CONF
So there was a guy called Jakob Handel in German
or Jacobo Gallus in Latin, and he was actually from
NOTE CONF
Slovenia, what is now Slovenia.
It wasn't then, and he was a composer and an
NOTE CONF
organist, and he wrote a lot of religious music, and
he also a lot of wrote a lot of secular
NOTE CONF
music, including madrigals.
And at some point he must have studied logic.
NOTE CONF
In fact, I know he studied logic, so he studied
logic at some point, and at some point he had
NOTE CONF
to learn that rhyme.
And well, it's got a nice jingle to it.
NOTE CONF
So he wrote a madrigal which sets the nice jingle
to music.
NOTE CONF
I happen to like medieval music, especially madrigals, so I
was quite pleased by this.
NOTE CONF
So let me get the rhyme back and then I
will attempt to.
NOTE CONF
See if this comes out.
It may be quite loud at the beginning.
NOTE CONF
I will reduce the volume if it's deafening.
But it isn't deafening.
NOTE CONF
So let me.
Go back and start again.
NOTE CONF
Because that was very far from deafening.
Barbara, the knowledge that your body is an ordinary can
NOTE CONF
be modified to love stop it.
Stop it!
NOTE CONF
This office will prepare us for tomorrow.
Tomorrow is the summer.
NOTE CONF
For more reasons.
Tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
This is the law, says I.
It says.
NOTE CONF
And he compares his promised rest passing over.
No offence in the world, but of all the cinnamon
NOTE CONF
rolls of cinnamon.
Roll down.
NOTE CONF
Shut up, shut up!
The Lord is often sweet to me.
NOTE CONF
Not to me.
Not part of the reason.
NOTE CONF
The reason.
The reason for the Lord and Saviour for us and
NOTE CONF
God is not, etc..
All our sins are negative.
NOTE CONF
This song called him at all is called the Master.
He said, are saying you are ready for the mega
NOTE CONF
mega mega mega mega mega mega mega most of our
Lord Jesus.
NOTE CONF
Amen.
It is he are to be there also are remarkable
NOTE CONF
for said both my Lord and said both my own
and money of the dominion of my Lord.
NOTE CONF
And but in your body, your money, your body, your
friends, they call me Norman, said to are your body,
NOTE CONF
your body, your body all say.
But when the morning that he of your the body
NOTE CONF
of the body, your body of all, and be ordained
for.
NOTE CONF
But as an ordinary day, your body is an ordinary
An Eagle Ford astronaut and.
NOTE CONF
Former astronaut.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
If you were listening carefully, you might have noticed that
it started with this.
NOTE CONF
And then there was a second verse, which was slightly
different.
NOTE CONF
There are several versions of this rhyme, so I think
he set two of them, but I'm not quite sure
NOTE CONF
because I can't find the score for this online and
I'm too lazy to do it elsewhere.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you want to look this stuff up, these
are the sources I used.
NOTE CONF
Um, that is Aristotle in translation.
Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy.
NOTE CONF
If I haven't mentioned this, I should, because it's an
invaluable resource for all kinds of philosophical logic and all
NOTE CONF
other kinds of logic as well, despite being an encyclopaedia
of philosophy.
NOTE CONF
Um, and in particular, this article will tell you about
Aristotle's logic in a reasonably accessible way.
NOTE CONF
Sharp articles are written at quite a high level, but
they are generally understandable.
NOTE CONF
This is a link to some stuff about the medieval
theory, and this was a handy blog that I found
NOTE CONF
by somebody else who's a medievalist, medieval logician, or what
have you call it.
NOTE CONF
Who unpacked all this stuff?
Because this is on Wikipedia, but the Wikipedia entry is
NOTE CONF
seriously crap, and I haven't taken the effort to improve
it myself.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that is the end of part one.
I don't suppose there were any questions, but if there
NOTE CONF
are any questions I can take.
These any of the words in the right hand?
NOTE CONF
Oh, yes.
Um, some of the words mean something.
NOTE CONF
So Keller and they are hurrying.
um, clients, those who are hurrying diabetes.
NOTE CONF
You will give um faster no I hurry um says
I vocative of no ablative of Caesar.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So there are some random stuff.
There is.
NOTE CONF
Um, well, as far as I know.
So the words ending in on look like Greek, but
NOTE CONF
I don't know whether Burgh lepton is a Greek word
or not.
NOTE CONF
Um, not obviously.
Phil Upton, I'm sure is not Decimus, I think means
NOTE CONF
something in Latin, but I can't remember because it's a
long time since I did Latin.
NOTE CONF
So yeah.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
So I think they chose a word that existed if
they could think of one at the time.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what's part two?
I promise to say a bit more about regular expressions
NOTE CONF
that we were talking about last week.
So.
NOTE CONF
That is not working properly.
Is it because.
NOTE CONF
It's a non-standard slide.
Because I don't want you seeing the next slide.
NOTE CONF
I just want you seeing the current slide.
Um, this is another talk I gave to my institute
NOTE CONF
after I started teaching this course, because in the course
of teaching this course, I learn more about regular expressions
NOTE CONF
than I had previously known.
And I thought this stuff would be fun for them.
NOTE CONF
And then what about you?
So this is regular expressions as we teach it to
NOTE CONF
you, and you will do more of them next year.
So if you remember I talked about the computer science
NOTE CONF
notation versus the programming notation.
So we have the input symbols single letters, empty string,
NOTE CONF
concatenation, union, which we might write with the set union
symbol.
NOTE CONF
And we have the star that's the looping operator.
E star means any number of repetitions of whatever E
NOTE CONF
does, and we use brackets all over the place in
the usual way.
NOTE CONF
I don't think I even said that because it's just
obvious.
NOTE CONF
And we can't do intersection and complementation and negation with
regular expressions, because we can't do them with nondeterministic automata
NOTE CONF
nicely.
If we want to do complement and intersection with nondeterministic
NOTE CONF
automata, we have to turn them into deterministic ones, which
blows them up.
NOTE CONF
So if you remember.
So this is theory I mentioned programming notation.
NOTE CONF
So where did the programming notation come from.
Well in real life that meant mostly Unix.
NOTE CONF
And for a long time there were two programs grep
and then later e grep um, which are what you
NOTE CONF
use to search for things in a file.
And the Unix notation is letters concatenation union written with
NOTE CONF
a bar, the star parentheses.
And then all this sugar that I mentioned last week.
NOTE CONF
So syntactic sugar remember is stuff that makes it easier
to write but doesn't give you any new power.
NOTE CONF
Anything that is an A, B or a C something
that is not A to Z.
NOTE CONF
It's something that can make sense in a word, an
optional x, y, z at least one a.
NOTE CONF
And I didn't mention this, but one of the things
that is often available is between 3 and 7 copies
NOTE CONF
of BCC.
Not something you use very often, but you use it
NOTE CONF
sometimes.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I also mentioned right at the end of last time
in a bit of a hurry, that in normal use
NOTE CONF
of regular expressions, you write one and it matches anywhere
in the string.
NOTE CONF
But we often want to anchor it as it's called
to the beginning or the end of the string, which
NOTE CONF
is what we did when we were doing them with
automata.
NOTE CONF
So this is the expression that matches the entire string
in the comma omega.
NOTE CONF
And in everyday life, it's useful to have things that
match at the beginning or end of a word, for
NOTE CONF
example.
So this is a string that matches the word v,
NOTE CONF
because the backslash b is a special symbol that matches
the empty string, provided it becomes between a letter and
NOTE CONF
a non letter.
So match is the edge of the word.
NOTE CONF
And there are lots more of these things.
And actually there are more of them than I can
NOTE CONF
remember.
And this stuff is still syntactic sugar, but I reckon
NOTE CONF
you might have to think a little bit about how
you will write down the automaton to do them.
NOTE CONF
Um, particularly with the zero width things, you can do
it.
NOTE CONF
Um, then things changed.
So Larry Wall, the great Larry Wall invented the programming
NOTE CONF
language Perl, which I may just have mentioned a few
times.
NOTE CONF
And Larry was Larry invented Perl for a very, very
practical reason.
NOTE CONF
It was his job to produce a large number of
reports about data.
NOTE CONF
And so he invented Perl as a language to make
it very easy to produce reports about data.
NOTE CONF
So Perl may possibly stand for practical extraction and report
language.
NOTE CONF
Um, or alternatively, it stands for pathologically eclectic.
Rubbish.
NOTE CONF
Lister.
Mm.
NOTE CONF
Um.
You had a talk from Phil on Monday, right?
NOTE CONF
Phil is one of the leaders of the programming language
group.
NOTE CONF
He probably thinks he's the leader of the programming language
group.
NOTE CONF
But other people might have different ideas.
And whatever they do, Perl is the opposite of.
NOTE CONF
So every principle of good language design, Perl does the
opposite.
NOTE CONF
So I've told you, most of my programming is in
Perl.
NOTE CONF
And the general idea of Perl is if you see
something that looks cool in some other language, steal it.
NOTE CONF
Very much in the way that.
So the same approach that English takes to other languages,
NOTE CONF
Perl takes to programming languages.
That, by the way, is why my poor tutorial group
NOTE CONF
are mostly here because I've moved their tutorial to after
this lecture here.
NOTE CONF
Um, so lots of things which you will learn about
at various points associative arrays.
NOTE CONF
If you've done PHP programming, you know about those references
we haven't told you about.
NOTE CONF
Call by name.
You may learn about at some point dynamic binding, static
NOTE CONF
binding.
If you do advanced language classes or whatever there is,
NOTE CONF
Perl probably has it and it never gets rid of
anything.
NOTE CONF
So Perl is very backwards compatible for 40 years or
so.
NOTE CONF
Not entirely, but as much as you can be.
Oh, and if there's stuff in other languages that people
NOTE CONF
think is good but it gets in your way, then
forget about it.
NOTE CONF
So we've been telling you why types are a good
thing.
NOTE CONF
Perl's attitude types is, well, it might be convenient to
have strings and numbers, but it's also convenient if I
NOTE CONF
automatically convert between them whenever I think it would make
sense to you, which is almost all the time.
NOTE CONF
Very useful.
So Perl wasn't the only language that was pushing for
NOTE CONF
more complicated regular expressions, but it's the most influential.
I say probably actually, it just is, because nowadays we
NOTE CONF
have things called Pcrs.
I mentioned them last week.
NOTE CONF
Perl compatible regular expressions or preposterously convoluted regular expressions.
That's a Larry ism, of course.
NOTE CONF
And those things have spread like some ghastly disease, and
they found their way back into even the original Unix
NOTE CONF
utilities.
So once upon a time, grep was a nice, simple
NOTE CONF
program which just searched for a regular expression in a
file.
NOTE CONF
Nowadays, you can choose what sort of regular expression you
want, and if you want to use Perl regular expressions,
NOTE CONF
you can with some reservations because as we'll see, regular
expressions are so complicated that it's not always obvious how
NOTE CONF
to implement them.
So what can you do?
NOTE CONF
This is something I mentioned again quite late in the
last lecture.
NOTE CONF
When we actually use regular expressions in real life, we're
not just saying does it match, we want to know
NOTE CONF
which bit of the input matched.
And in real life we have cleaning star and alternation.
NOTE CONF
So that's supposed to be non-deterministic but we can't do
non-determinism.
NOTE CONF
So as I said we have deterministic nondeterminism.
So here's an example.
NOTE CONF
In normal regular expression syntax this means look for an
angle bracket followed by any number of anything followed by
NOTE CONF
an angle bracket.
So dot means any character and star means any number
NOTE CONF
of.
So you might hope that this would find XML HTML
NOTE CONF
tags.
And if you don't know what XML tags are, they
NOTE CONF
are like HTML, but more general.
And so in particular, they are extremely annoying to deal
NOTE CONF
with.
Does this find the tag irritating when I match it
NOTE CONF
against this input?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Anybody think otherwise?
Actually, by default it finds the bit between irritating and
NOTE CONF
that irritating.
Because the general approach to star is this says any
NOTE CONF
number of anything.
Well, we could say that means that number.
NOTE CONF
Or we could say it means that number.
It's non-determinism.
NOTE CONF
So if this were actually a non-deterministic finite automaton, both
these paths would be accepting paths.
NOTE CONF
We can't do that.
What do we do?
NOTE CONF
in real life.
Regular expressions.
NOTE CONF
We implement this in what is called the greedy way.
When you're trying to match this, you swallow up as
NOTE CONF
many characters as you can with the star, and then
you see if you can find the angle bracket.
NOTE CONF
So if you take the greedy approach, you read the
angle left bracket, then you read dot and you keep
NOTE CONF
going.
So actually you keep going all the way to the
NOTE CONF
end and then you say, whoops, I can't find an
angle bracket.
NOTE CONF
So I go back one back one back one, back
one until I hit there.
NOTE CONF
And now I've read as many dots as I possibly
can and then find an angle bracket.
NOTE CONF
Um, often this is not actually what you want.
For example, if I wanted to pull out the tag
NOTE CONF
irritating from here, what I want is the opposite of
greedy.
NOTE CONF
I want the thing that swallows up as few things
as possible.
NOTE CONF
And in traditional Unix regular expressions, you had to work
around it by doing things like this.
NOTE CONF
Let me look for an angle bracket followed by three
things that are not an angle bracket as often as
NOTE CONF
possible, and then an angle bracket.
And this gets very boring very soon.
NOTE CONF
So in modern Perl compatible regular expressions, we can write
star query to mean swallow up as few things as
NOTE CONF
possible, and then find an angle bracket so that finds
the tag irritating in the sequel.
NOTE CONF
Um, is it obvious that doing this isn't giving you
any more expressive power?
NOTE CONF
It's maybe not totally obvious.
This particular one doesn't, because you can always work around
NOTE CONF
it by doing something like this.
But that's not the only way.
NOTE CONF
Why do I say this is calling backtracking behaviour?
Because what this is saying is we want to do
NOTE CONF
as little backtracking as possible.
So always look to see if you can find the
NOTE CONF
angle bracket, and if you can then stop swallowing up
with the star.
NOTE CONF
Whereas the standard implementation says swallow off as much as
possible and then back off until you can find an
NOTE CONF
angle bracket.
Um, another thing, and actually this is something we do
NOTE CONF
use, I was looking.
So the university email system is extremely annoying, right?
NOTE CONF
Do you find it extremely annoying or are you just
brought up with outlook?
NOTE CONF
So you're used to this crap and therefore don't understand
why it's crap?
NOTE CONF
It does many very annoying things.
In particular, it corrupts your email by inserting stupid messages
NOTE CONF
at the beginning.
Like you don't often get mail from so-and-so.
NOTE CONF
And so I have a filter that filters out all
this rubbish, and one of the filters actually uses this
NOTE CONF
stuff.
Um, when you write a string in a programming language
NOTE CONF
like Haskell or JavaScript or whatever, you have the problem,
that you write it inside quotes.
NOTE CONF
And what do you do if you want to have
a quote in the string?
NOTE CONF
There are two standard approaches.
One of them is to say.
NOTE CONF
I will use a magic escape character.
It's called an escape character because it somehow escapes from
NOTE CONF
the special meaning.
Says this quote is not the end of the string,
NOTE CONF
it's actually the actual character.
Some languages do this.
NOTE CONF
By doubling the character you want, but this is the
most common one in languages today.
NOTE CONF
Um, now JavaScript is a language which allows you to
quote strings with either single quotes or double quotes as
NOTE CONF
long as you match them, which is actually quite useful
because in JavaScript is used for writing web applications and
NOTE CONF
in web applications, you are putting a lot of text,
and you often want to put quotes or double quotes
NOTE CONF
in the text.
PHP does the same if you are doing web programming.
NOTE CONF
So if we ignore the matter of escapes, then this
is a match for a JavaScript string.
NOTE CONF
And what it says is the string begins with either
a double quote or a single quote, and I'm putting
NOTE CONF
brackets around it to tag that as a single thing
that I can talk about later.
NOTE CONF
Then it has anything, any number of times, and we
want it to be greedy because we don't want to
NOTE CONF
see any, quote, symbols.
And then it has the same kind of quote we
NOTE CONF
saw at the beginning.
So in particular.
NOTE CONF
That's a good string because I see a double quote
and then I swallow anything.
NOTE CONF
I swallow anything, as few of anything as possible until
I see another.
NOTE CONF
Whatever I saw first and equally.
That's a good string.
NOTE CONF
Recognise that expression.
So that's quite useful.
NOTE CONF
Um, and in this particular case, it's fairly obvious that
you could do it with old fashioned regular expressions too.
NOTE CONF
However, you can also write down something like this.
This says I read some number of A's and then
NOTE CONF
I read a B, and then I read the same
number of A's as I read before the B.
NOTE CONF
This is not something that can be done with finite
automata.
NOTE CONF
So you will prove this in inf two.
But you might like to think about why you can't
NOTE CONF
do it with finite automata.
And even worse, this is a thing that says I
NOTE CONF
read a string and then I read the same string
again.
NOTE CONF
Um, that's also not something that can be done with
finite automata, and it can't even be done with some
NOTE CONF
more powerful notion of automaton that you will meet next
year.
NOTE CONF
Um, let's skip that because you don't know about it.
So you might ask if you add this stuff.
NOTE CONF
What is the power of the expressions you get?
It's certainly more than finite automata.
NOTE CONF
And it's more than these are called pushdown automata, these
things that let you do more.
NOTE CONF
But what is it?
And actually, I don't know.
NOTE CONF
And I can't find anybody who's gone to the trouble
of tying it down.
NOTE CONF
Precisely.
Um, this is common.
NOTE CONF
So lots of languages allow you to use back references.
Um, that's only the beginning of the stuff Perl does.
NOTE CONF
So it also does things like let me look ahead
without actually doing a match.
NOTE CONF
So this says I want to read a string of
digits.
NOTE CONF
So backslash D is a digit at least one of
them.
NOTE CONF
And when I get to the end look ahead to
check that it's followed by a word but don't actually
NOTE CONF
include the word in the match.
So this is sort of peering ahead but not actually
NOTE CONF
eating the word.
Um, this is something that I wrote down in an
NOTE CONF
attempt to match a standard floating point number, and later
realised that I got it wrong.
NOTE CONF
So I'll put the slides on back on the page
after tomorrow's lecture.
NOTE CONF
So if you want to do the exercises, you can
um, and this kind of thing is quite powerful because
NOTE CONF
it means you can do intersections.
So if I say at the beginning of the string,
NOTE CONF
look ahead to see if it matches pattern one and
then swallow pattern two, that means that the string matches
NOTE CONF
pattern one.
Intersection pattern two.
NOTE CONF
So suddenly we've got intersection of regexp and therefore intersection
of finite automata.
NOTE CONF
And I think that this doesn't have any power, but
I'm not entirely sure.
NOTE CONF
Um, I think I won't talk about backtracking control because
it's a bit complex.
NOTE CONF
Um, then we get recursive regular expressions.
So one of the most annoying things about regular expressions
NOTE CONF
is that you can't use them to match brackets, and
matching brackets is what you want to do in every
NOTE CONF
programming language you ever write or ever analyse, and also
in your English if you want to write, well, decent
NOTE CONF
English.
Um, so Perl will let you write a regular expression
NOTE CONF
to match a balanced parenthesis.
So what it says is, well, the parenthesis starts with
NOTE CONF
something that is a bracket followed by An arbitrary number
of things that aren't brackets, either open or close, and
NOTE CONF
it ends with a closing bracket preceded by an arbitrary
number of things that aren't open or closed brackets.
NOTE CONF
And in the middle it's got the same regular expression
again.
NOTE CONF
So this is a recursive call of the same regular
expression, which is quite cool.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is a famous example of a non regular
string.
NOTE CONF
This can't be matched with finite automata.
You will prove that next year as well.
NOTE CONF
But this very simple recursive regular expression matches it.
Um, that's pretty bad.
NOTE CONF
Very useful, but pretty bad.
But because Perl is Perl, it actually lets you write
NOTE CONF
an arbitrary program inside the regular expression, which can look
at what has been matched so far and do stuff
NOTE CONF
with it.
Um, I have never seen this in practice because I
NOTE CONF
don't think I can't imagine why you would want to
do this.
NOTE CONF
Um, it does have a manual.
Perl has a very good manual for its regular expressions.
NOTE CONF
Here's a couple of key extracts.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now let's get back to good old fashioned regular expressions.
NOTE CONF
Have you ever come across a website that has failed
to validate an email address?
NOTE CONF
If you have nice, simple email addresses, you won't have
this problem.
NOTE CONF
But if you have any slightly sophisticated email address, an
email addresses can be a lot more complex than you
NOTE CONF
think they can.
And how do people validate them?
NOTE CONF
They match them against some regular expression, which they dreamed
up because they thought they were clever.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you actually want to validate email addresses according
to the email standard, the right regular expression looks like
NOTE CONF
this.
Uh, it goes on a good bit further down the
NOTE CONF
page, and that doesn't even address the fact that you
can put comments in regular expressions.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that was regular expressions in everyday life.
And that's today.
NOTE CONF
So tomorrow is infinity big numbers and some pretty pictures.
So hopefully see most of you tomorrow.
NOTE CONF